great you have a full coin in the
background I mean I'm duck calendar in
front Doug your arrives made me from the
Frankfurt School at least it comes out
of that tradition what elements of their
thinking you find exciting and useful
today
well the Frankfurt School is really the
first group of theorists that discovered
the importance of mass culture and mass
communications that in the u.s. and the
advanced capitalist countries but also
the communist world and fascist Germany
that they were refugees from mass
culture is becoming an important form of
social integration that things like
films and comic books and broadcasting
were vehicles of ideology and in their
classic study of the culture industries
and dialectic of enlightenment Adorno
and Horkheimer were the first to show
that social theory to conceptualize how
society works needs to have a theory of
mass culture and mass communications
moreover that this has political
ramifications they were concerned with
the integration of the working class in
advanced capitalist societies and how it
was that the proletariat which was
supposed to be the revolutionary most
progressive force in society and the
classical Marxist theory had been
integrated into a conservative social
force and mass culture was one of the
explanations for that that people were
deceived in doctrine aided mystified by
mass culture that mass culture was a
form of ideology that served the
interests of the ruling class and was
thus a new mode of social control so
that was the starting point for my work
in popular culture and I still think
today that they're right that mass
culture is an important component of
contemporary capitalist societies that
to understand the organization of our
societies we need to understand the role
of mass culture and mass communication
or I came to disagree with them and I
think I was influenced here by the
British cultural studies tradition was
this notion that mass culture was a unit
unit monolithic form of domination and
ideology that there was it was a one
dimensional form in which it was totally
a vehicle for conservative ideology
following the approach of the cultural
studies tradition that was influenced by
the Italian theory theorist
Antonio Gramsci they developed a
hegemony force a Germany model of
popular culture that each society is a
sort of matrix of conflicting groups and
forces and subcultures that the ruling
class for instance is divided into class
sectors sometimes a conservative sector
sometimes a liberal sector becomes the
hegemonic the dominant force in the
society but it is always battling
opposing forces that there are new
social movements that there are
oppositional groups there's individuals
fighting for a counter hegemony be it
socialists or feminists or black or
brown liberationists that society is a
matrix of struggle and in this way I
move to the position that popular
culture itself is a contested terrain
that the different groups who are
fighting for dominance in society have
ideologies their ideologies are
articulated in popular culture and so in
the United States for instance you have
liberals producing liberal texts and
popular culture conservatives producing
conservative ones right wingers
producing ultra-right texts feminist
socialist different groups are producing
texts that reflect that reproduce their
ideology okay in terms of practice
there's a lot of academics of course the
theorize about cultural studies what's
the link between a theorization of
cultural studies and the practice well
for people that are radicals that are
progressives in some way it shouldn't be
enough simply to analyze to criticize
popular culture that's an important part
of the tasks of developing alternatives
to the current society showing what's
wrong with the society and developing
alternatives which can be
intellectual that can be sort of utopian
blueprints for an alternative society
but then the question comes how to
realize these alternatives what kind of
politics do we need to engage in to
change society and here I think that
people that are studying and criticizing
popular culture should be aware one of
the power of culture in society that
forced the impact the culture has on
individuals and that's the importance of
developing a cultural politics so people
that are engaged in the study of popular
culture who want social transformation
should engage in the practice of
cultural politics be it producing an
alternative video or music or film or
dance or whatever media one is involved
in or as I'm involved in developing
alternative information resources I've
been involved for about 11 years in
Austin Texas
in producing a weekly public affairs
television program called alternative
views where we literally try to have
people on that will articulate the views
that are excluded from the mainstream
media in the United States be they
representatives from the third world
countries like Nicaragua or Cuba or El
Salvador people in the liberation
movement be they feminists anti-nuclear
activist 'it's like Helen Caldicott the
American atheist theorist Madalyn Murray
O'Hair be they black Chicanos gays
Native Americans any number of social
groups are excluded from the mainstream
media so our television project is a
attempt to get these voices into the
political debate to allow them to
articulate their alternative views and I
think the left needs to see the
importance of providing alternative
information taking advantage of the new
technologies as well as the print media
that most of us initially have worked in
too much of the left it seems to me is
print oriented thinking and is indeed
sometimes technophobe
thinking that television and video and
film is at the based form of production
the image somehow video is intrinsically
manipulate conservative reactionary in
its effects and that's merely limiting
their activity to writing or speaking or
demonstrating etc whereas if it's the
case that most of the people get their
views of the world their information
from the television then it seems
obvious that the left should intervene
in the media that people are most
involved with and present alternatives
to have left interventions feminine
feminist interventions in the dominant
media in a society to develop a left
cultural politics and a left media
politic this has been the theoretical
and practical agenda that I've been
working with for 10 or 15 years now the
creation of cultural politics often
times tends to be skin mattias because
of different theoretical interests
within the left post modernism for
example being an important theory that
the left has embraced well there's two
questions one is how to what extent post
modernists theory lumen AIT's the trends
in cultural studies and the other one is
of course is to what extent is
contemporary culture for smarter right
the main insight of postmodern theory is
that our contemporary society
is an image producing and proliferating
society this was one of Beaudry yards
early insights that radical semi energy
the production the proliferation of
images characterizes the very essence as
it were of our society it used to be the
case that in modernity on Beaudry yards
model industrial production was what the
society was all about the production of
commodities buying selling consumption
etc but even consumption Baudrillard saw
was more and more structure around image
what he called signed value you bought a
product you exhibited a product for its
prestige moreover the media do nothing
but produce images so we have these
images machines that are saturating our
culture with images this is creating new
of experience new consciousness in which
literacy the word verbal discursive
culture is on the decline an image
culture is on the rise so this is one
essential insight of postmodern theory
that helps us understand our current
situation I think the middle baudrillard
also had many insights into simulation
hyper reality the way that models and
codes are coming to constitute our
experience of the world for instance
Reagan being a simulated president he's
not a real president he doesn't really
know politics he acts he follows a
script there's a model of what the
president should be looked like etc that
he acts out on cue with his teleprompter
etc so he's basically simulating the
presidency and more and more of our
culture is being determined by these
simulation models so these are some real
insights that postmodern theory has what
they do is a race very often such things
as ideology class oppression
manipulation etc they're more of a
descriptive theory about images and
codes and hyper reality and less of a
critical theory the way that say Marxism
and feminism and other theories are that
analyse the ideologies the messages that
are being conveyed a lot of postmodern
theory is sort of formalist in its
analysis as technologically determinist
that the images themselves are
autonomous and I would argue false
they're part of a system of production
that is still capitalist corporations
advertising agencies media industries
but a journal and Horkheimer called the
culture industries that are producing
these images that are still in my
opinion serving the interest of a
dominant class that controls the media
and that reflects their interest their
views of the world that are ideology so
it just seems to me demented that the
post modernists want to throw ideology
out as a category to throw out content
analysis as if only the form of
images were what is at stake in popular
culture studies I would advocate a
dialectical approach where we analyzed
the new forms of image this traits the
quality of postmodern image production
but we also see what the content the
messages the effects of these things are
to a certain extent postmodern theory
follows McLuhan that the media is the
message the formal effects of a media
have the determinative role in the
impact of the media on culture this
seems half right there's definitely some
insight in there but it seems to me that
the content the ideology the messages
are still extremely important and I
think actually semiotic gives us a
better handle on this where there are
signifiers signifies there's codes
there's systems of image production and
it seems that approach is still
extremely useful so I think postmodern
theory can be useful in illuminating
aspects of our image environment our
media society but to take it as the end
all and be all to go the extreme pomo
route seems to me absolutely disabling
for critical analysis of the media and
its effects plus in Beaudry yards model
at least it leads to cynicism and
pessimism Baudrillard de prise all forms
of alternative media practice he doesn't
see the possibility of intervening
within a media system or a popular
culture system with genuine alternatives
everything just gets absorbed in pure
image proliferation so alternative
cultural politics or media production
would be part of the problem or just
more of the same rather than presenting
any alternatives so this seems to me a
sort of politically cynical and
disabling move on the part of
Baudrillard another post modernist I'll
take a little drink the other question
is going to be Bingley and this is just
off to talk to me
and cultural studies the importance of
cultural studies right now why is it in
the late 80s and early nineties we have
the emergence of these this new
discipline and the different kind of
intellectual traditions that make up
this I think right I think it's not
accidental that postmodern theory and
cultural studies both emerged in the
1980s as widespread models for the
analysis of popular culture is precisely
the proliferation of forms of popular
culture of the images of popular culture
the increased popularity of film of
popular music of television of any
number of forms of culture in the 1980s
that the post modernists have been
describing that makes it imperative to
study academically and to valorize
politically these different forms of
culture there has also been and this is
another postmodern point an erosion of
the distinction between high and low
culture so-called
in the Academy that English departments
are no longer just teaching English and
the Canon and the great works that are
also looking at alternative marginal
literature's excluded voices different
types of oppositional literature and tax
and the forms of popular culture
now cultural studies as it divided as it
developed in England in the Birmingham
school made this broad range of popular
culture the terrain of study from the
beginning they attacked the distinction
between high and low culture they
valorized the importance of popular
culture in people's lives and for left
political projects in the way that I
discussed earlier moreover they gave
critical methods of analyzing popular
culture ideology critiqued Freudian
symbol criticism feminism as a
perspective and critical method for
analyzing popular culture that are of
extreme importance today so cultural
studies both is sort of a project of
study as at the
in England as a methodology to criticize
and analyze popular culture and popular
cults cultural studies as a political
project involved with critiques and
analyses of the hegemonic the dominant
forms of culture in a society that also
studied the marginal subcultures the
cultures of resistance that would form
the possibility of what Gramsci called a
counter hegemony strikes me also is an
extremely important political
intervention within the field of the
study of popular culture indeed this
obviously connects with what I was
talking about earlier the need to have
alternative cultural and political
interventions as well as just cultural
analyses and so therefore I think the
cultural studies offers a nice a very
productive political project now what
I'm worried about in terms of the
appropriation of cultural studies
particularly in the United States I
can't speak for Canada although one can
imagine this could also be a product
problem here and that is a deep
politicized version of cultural studies
where in the Academy and the
universities in the United States
they're perfectly willing today to study
any form of popular culture to have
cultural studies programs that mostly by
the way get into English departments and
used the forms of literary criticism to
study television film popular music etc
and they may even be willing to use
Marxist ideology critique structuralism
post-structuralism cycle analysis but
they abstract the study of culture from
this political project that was part of
the Birmingham school of British
cultural studies and basically they're
eliminating gronski from the field of
cultural studies because it was Bronski
who analyzed culture in terms of a
theory of hegemony the ways the forms of
popular culture produced the hegemony of
a given class group for sex or race in a
given society that was also concerned
with counter hegemony with oppositional
forms of culture that would produce
social alternatives and social
transformation there's a real danger
that this type of political project and
analysis and critique will be erased
from the field of cultural studies as
it's institutionalized in the United
States and perhaps Canada which now
brings this to where we are and that is
the popular culture conference in this
sense cultural studies sort of defanged
of its political project is no different
or is little different let us say then
the kinds of studies of popular culture
by the popular culture Association which
is willing to study each and every and
any form of popular culture to make an
an academically respectable discipline
and this is the positive moment of the
popular cultural tradition here this PCA
convention has been an important force
in intervening within American academic
scenes to make the study of popular
culture viable but there's a serious
problem in their approach to popular
culture and that is it tends and many of
its practitioners to be to empiricist
and to anti are even hostile to theory
where it just simply describes and even
celebrates the forms of popular culture
be it quilting or comic books or horror
films or popular literature or whatever
that these things are viewed on
critically now the cultural studies even
in its D politicized form will be more
theoretical than the popular culture
tradition of the PCA so in that sense
even a deep politicized cultural studies
in the US or Canada would be an
advancement in terms of the theoretical
and critical project over the PCA but
both ad politicized cultural studies and
the sort of often apolitical popular
culture association approach will miss
we'll lose out on this political project
that British cultural studies was
initially involved in and thus would be
a regression behind that model so if I
had to valorize any sort of approach the
popular culture I guess it would be the
drop skiing approach as was incorporated
in the British popular culture of
British cultural studies tradition on
the other hand in terms of describing my
own work I would describe it as more
eclectic than following any particular
line be it the critical theorist be it
gronski be it the Birmingham school for
instance my book camera poltica that I
co-authored with Michael Ryan was a
study of Hollywood film from the 1960s
to the present that was relating the
major trends and tendencies and
blockbusters of Hollywood film to the
new social movements to the political
struggle in the United States to the
historical issues and turmoils of the
time the project was to combine the sort
of historical materialist approach to
history with the Frankford approach the
ideology critique to feminism post
structuralism and the new critical
methods that are being developed to show
how one could use all of these different
methods different schools to analyze
popular culture and this is the position
I would take today that ultimately a
multi perspectival approach to popular
culture is the richest any single take
on popular culture is going to have as
paul de mon would say its blindness and
its
insight that doing a pure feminist
reading is going to really illuminate
gender doing a psychoanalytic reading is
going to illuminate certain aspects of
the unconscious and sexuality and other
topics that psychoanalysis is good at
doing a Marxist ideology critique is
going to illuminate the things but each
one of these methods taken in and of
itself will have its limitations it's
blue
- and that to do a more
multi-dimensional mode of cultural
analysis and critique you need a variety
of methods now this doesn't necessarily
lead to pluralism and eclecticism
because different projects different
analyzed in different texts or having
different sorts of ideals or goals or
projects would require using different
of these theories and excluding other
ones sort of clash a few years back at
the UN which focused on communications
we're a 3rd world countries and what it
made me think of it was you're talking
about alternative sort of right where
you had you had the third world talking
about a conspiracy by the communicators
led to a crisis in UN where US was
holding back payments and so forth I
guess the question becomes you know
that's not going to go away like the
builders of these images in a message
are going to continue to be the networks
right how do you see in the big picture
any change in that or is that going to
become more of us than them what's going
to happen
okay my jaw I think the final thing that
I would like to talk about is the need
to integrate not only a multi
perspectival approach to the theory to
the critique of popular culture but also
to merge studies in popular culture
analysis with mass communication now one
of the great grounding insights of the
Frankfurt School was that math more the
forms of popular culture rather than a
system of mass cultural production the
system of political economy the modes of
cultural imperialism in which products
that are produced in the United States
and the advertising agencies the
networks the media conglomerates are
disseminated all over the world and form
a type of cultural imperialism
particularly US cultural imperialism so
I think that to analyze the full range
of the production and effects of culture
you have to go to a mass communication
approach - and this brings in a lot of
political issues that I think are
essential to a political analysis of
mass culture and mass communications for
instance in the United Nations several
years ago
UNESCO tried to oppose this cultural
imperialism by the u.s. so that
countries could control their satellite
communications their national media
networks so that a certain percentage of
products would be controlled by the
people in the country so that for
instance planet or France would produce
a certain percentage of their television
or radio or film production so you
wouldn't have your market flooded with
the products from the United States now
the United States fought this they
wanted open skies open markets no quota
as a entry ticket for cultural
imperialism and domination because
UNESCO was dominated by countries that
wanted to block this form of US cultural
imperialism
the u.s. tried to defund UNESCO to
threaten the United Nations that well if
you pursue these policies we're not
going to give you any money so there's
all kinds of international geopolitical
issue in the politics of communication
and far too often people that do pop
popular culture studies neglect these
kinds of issues I think are inseparable
from the analysis and theory of popular
culture that it's absolutely essential
to ground one's theories and analyses of
popular culture in broader theories of
mass communication that talk about the
production the distribution and the
reception of popular culture one final
point we haven't really got into another
key insight of the Birmingham school the
decoding this is something else that
needs to be studied the way people use
and and and convey self valorized the
products of popular culture there's a
tendency in the frankfurt school to have
too much of a manipulation model in
which you simply analyze the messages
the ideologies and you assume the
audience is a indoctrinated that it
simply passively reproduces the ideas
the forms behavior that are disseminated
through the media industries whereas the
possibility of cultural resistance on
the form of the audience on behalf of
the audience the possibility of the
decoding of the media product in a way
against the intention of the producers
of this thing is an important insight
that again goes back to the birmingham
school at least i first got this
position from the very early Stuart Hall
paper on encoding decoding so this is an
important element of a critical approach
to cultural studies but you can go too
far in this sort of celebrations of the
use and gratifications
of popular culture and you can loot use
your lose your critical thrust certain
theorists I think have gone too far in
that direction over
reacting against the Frankfurt School
and over exaggerating the extent to
which individuals can decode in their
own autonomous ways that makes popular
culture thus more harmless and just
simply more fun and less potent than it
was in some of these other theories
you mentioned fun and pleasure the
importance of popular culture as being
the site of fun and pleasure right but
you know wife-beating may be fun fascism
is fun torture and murder may be fun for
sadists that valorising popular culture
is good per se simply because it
produces pleasure
I think is the worst approach to popular
culture that when that goes back to an
early bouche wha theorists buy this guy
Stevenson of uses gratifications
pleasures of popular culture you need to
distinguish between sort of good and bad
pleasures pleasures that encode certain
ideologies that lead to sadomasochistic
sexist racist behavior or pleasures in
stratification of eroticism pleasure in
community in solidarity in individual
self failure ization etc that seems to
be sort of progressive emancipatory
kinds of pleasures I think one needs to
distinguish and discriminate between the
messages the pleasures of popular
culture and quite frankly you need a
normative theory and a political theory
to be able to make these kinds of
discriminations and I think it's an
important part of the critical project
at least to do this without mate and
wanting to erase all of these
distinctions which I would insist we
still need to make to have a critical
posture towards popular culture but we
have to elucidate and defend our
criteria of critique that also should be
seen as provisional
subject to negotiation transformation
and changes our experiences and
society's change it's not that there's
any universal you know criteria of taste
or political rectitude or anything